Jmr/v5 docs (#1747)
cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata: docs/api/v5-signals/nwss.md

---
title: NWSS Wastewater
parent: Delphi V5 Sources and Signals
grand_parent: Delphi V5 API
---

# National Wastewater Surveillance System (NWSS)
{: .no_toc}

| Attribute | Details |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Source Name** | `nwss` |
| **Data Source** | [National Wastewater Surveillance System (NWSS)](https://www.cdc.gov/nwss/index.html) |
| **Geographic Levels** | sewershed (see [Sampling Sites](#sampling-sites)) |
| **Temporal Granularity** | Weekly |
| **Reporting Cadence** | Weekly (typically updated on Fridays) |
| **Date of last data revision:** | Never (see [data revision docs](#changelog)) |

> | **Temporal Scope Start** | 2020-01-14 |

Reviewer: May want to include initial `report_time` and `latest_report_time`/`latest_reference_time`, though latest may be a bit tricky with jekyll

Author: We removed `latest_report_time` and `latest_reference_time` because they were never updated. There is a long discussion about this that started [here](https://github.com/cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata/pull/1654).

Reviewer: Those are actually a different concept than what I was suggesting; that discussion is about tracking internal Delphi data quality issues, which are separate problem (one which we have been a bit spotty about apparently).

I just mean tell users roughly when the data external revisioning starts and stops. I have a PR for a live updating version of that [here](https://github.com/cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata/pull/1748)

Author: Sounds good!

| **License** | [Public Domain US Government](https://www.usa.gov/government-works) |

## Changelog

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Click to expand</summary>

> No changes so far.

Reviewer: May want to include data ingestion start in the changelog

Author: Sounds good. Is [this](https://github.com/cmu-delphi/epidata-etl/blob/98b99eb14fe51847033468cfc6c4b2098ffc9f74/dags/delphi_nwss/nwss_socrata_asset.py#L38) the start date for ingestion?

Reviewer: https://delphi.cmu.edu/epidata/v5/metadata/?source=nwss
best to go straight to the source. The earliest report date is `2026-02-25`. We'll probably push that back when we integrate the older releases of the data but that's not ready yet

Author: Alright, I assumed that the ingestion start date doesn't necessarily match the earliest report date. Added now for Nwss and pophive

The CDC coordinates data collection across a national network of public health laboratories and contracted testing providers. For more detail on how sampling sites are selected and how surveys are conducted, see the [CDC NWSS data sources documentation](https://www.cdc.gov/wastewater/about/index.html#cdc_survey_profile_how_surveys_are_conducted-data-sources).

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta}

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Available Signals

Wastewater signals are constructed by combining a pathogen prefix with a post-processing suffix in the format `<pathogen_prefix>_<suffix>`. For example, combining the prefix `covid` with the suffix `avg_conc_lin` constructs the signal `covid_avg_conc_lin`.

### Pathogen Prefixes

| Prefix | Pathogen | Target PCR |
|---|---|---|
| `covid` | COVID-19 | SARS-CoV-2 |
| `flu` | Influenza | Influenza A |
| `flu_h5` | Avian Flu | H5 Influenza A |
| `rsv` | RSV | Respiratory Syncytial Virus |
| `measles` | Measles | Measles |
| `mpox_all` | Mpox (All Clades) | Mpox (all clades) |
| `mpox_clade_i` | Mpox Clade I | Mpox Clade I |
| `mpox_clade_ii` | Mpox Clade II | Mpox Clade II |

> | `mpox_nvo` | Mpox NVO | Non-variola orthopoxvirus |

Reviewer: I'm wondering if target_pcr should match extactly and be marked as code like the prefix is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Prefix | Pathogen | Target PCR | Socrata endpoint |
|---|---|---|---|
| `covid` | COVID-19 | `sars-cov-2` | [j9g8-acpt](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-SARS-CoV-2/j9g8-acpt/about_data) |
| `flu` | Influenza | `fluav` | [ymmh-divb](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Influenza-A/ymmh-divb/about_data) |
| `flu_h5` | Avian Flu | `fluav a h5` | [mtpu-urpp](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-H5-Influenza-A/mtpu-urpp/about_data) |
| `rsv` | RSV | `rsv` | [45cq-cw4i](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-RSV/45cq-cw4i/about_data) |
| `measles` | Measles | `mev_wt` | [akvg-8vrb](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Measles/akvg-8vrb/about_data) |
| `mpox_all` | Mpox (All Clades) | `hmpxv` | [xpxn-rzgz](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Mpox/xpxn-rzgz/about_data) |
| `mpox_clade_i` | Mpox Clade I | `hmpxv clade i` | [xpxn-rzgz](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Mpox/xpxn-rzgz/about_data) |
| `mpox_clade_ii` | Mpox Clade II | `hmpxv clade ii` | [xpxn-rzgz](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Mpox/xpxn-rzgz/about_data) |
| `mpox_nvo` | Mpox NVO | `nvo` | [xpxn-rzgz](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Mpox/xpxn-rzgz/about_data) |

```

### Suffixes

| Suffix | Metric Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `avg_conc` | Average Concentration | Concentration of the PCR target back-calculated to unconcentrated sample basis |
| `avg_conc_lin` | Average Concentration | Concentration of the PCR target on a per sample amount basis where all values are on a linear (not log10) concentration basis |
| `flowpop_lin` | Flow-Population | Flow-population normalized concentration (copies/person/day) |
| `mic_lin` | Microbial | Microbial normalized concentration (unitless ratio) |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For more details on the columns, see one of the socrata endpoints, e.g. [RSV](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-RSV/45cq-cw4i/about_data) which provides descriptions of all columns.
```
Tempted to put in more details, but I'm not sure exactly copy-pasting their notes is worthwhile.

Author: Agreed.

## Source-Specific Keys

Wastewater data has unique properties, including multiple facilities, replicate samples, and laboratory PCR targets. To support this granularity, the V5 table schema includes:

| Column | Key Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `nwss_source` | Primary Key (Extra Key) | The data provider or laboratory network that analyzed/reported the sample (see [Providers](#providers)). |
| `sample_index` | Primary Key (Extra Key) | An integer identifier mapped to the original sample's unique ID (`sample_id`). |

> | `pcr_target` | Value Column (Extra Value) | The target pathogen or organism analyzed in the sample (e.g., `sars-cov-2`, `fluav`, `rsv`). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `pcr_target` | Value Column (Extra Value) | The target pathogen or organism analyzed in the sample (e.g., `sars-cov-2`, `fluav`, `rsv`). Include to join onto the auxiliary metadata table|
```

## Auxiliary Metadata Table

> Since wastewater treatment facilities have static traits (such as populations served and lab methodologies) that do not change daily, this metadata is served in a companion table via the `/aux_data/` endpoint at `https://delphi.cmu.edu/epidata/v5/aux_data/?source=nwss`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since wastewater treatment facilities have sample-specific traits (such as populations served and lab methodologies) that can change with time, this metadata is served in a companion table via the `/aux_data/` endpoint at `https://delphi.cmu.edu/epidata/v5/aux_data/?source=nwss`.
```
particularly samples have values that can change with time but previously they've had populations that changed (not sure if that's still true)

## Signal features
The signals vary across the underlying data provider, the normalization method, and the post-processing method.

### Providers
The NWSS acts as a coordinating body, receiving wastewater data through a number of providers. Data providers can change as the project has evolved.
Most recently, in autumn 2023, the primary direct commercial provider for the NWSS changed from [Biobot](https://biobot.io/) to [Verily](https://publichealth.verily.com/). Measurement method and thus meaning varies by provider. Data from different providers varies widely in magnitude for the same nominal reporting units.
The following table shows the history of data providers:

| Provider | Available | Description |
|-|-|-|
| `cdc_verily` | 2023/10/30-Today | Data analyzed by [Verily](https://verily.com/solutions/public-health/wastewater) on behalf of the CDC directly. |
| `nwss` | 2020/06/21-Today | Data reported by the respective state, territorial, and local public health agencies; the actual processing may be done by a private lab such as Verily or Biobot, or the agency itself, or a partnering university. |

> | `wws` | 2021/12/26-Today | Data analyzed by [Wastewater Scan](https://www.wastewaterscan.org/en), a Stanford/Emory nonprofit, and then shared with the NWSS. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `wws` | 2021/12/26-Today | Data analyzed by [Wastewater Scan](https://www.wastewaterscan.org/en), a Stanford/Emory nonprofit, and then shared with the NWSS. Use of this data outside of public health decision making requires contacting WastewaterSCAN Anyone seeking to use the database for other purposes or for research is required to contact the WastewaterSCAN / SCAN team (email: [wwscan_stanford_emory@lists.stanford.edu](mailto:wwscan_stanford_emory@lists.stanford.edu)) and any use of the data should be cited appropriately (https://data.wastewaterscan.org/about/#18).|
```
They are very particular about contacting them and usage in general

> | `biobot` | 2020-2023 | Data analyzed by [Biobot](https://biobot.io/) and then shared with the NWSS. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `biobot` | 2020-2023 | Data analyzed by [Biobot](https://biobot.io/) and then shared with the NWSS. Not yet included in the API on account of formatting differences |
```

Author: It's now available.

## Estimation

### Aggregation

The `nwss` source serves sewershed-level directly as reported by the facilities and laboratories. This preserves the local resolution of the data without introducing smoothing or aggregation assumptions.

## Limitations

The NWSS is still expanding to get coverage nationwide, so it is currently an uneven sample; the largest signals above cover ~42 million people as of March 2024. Around 80% of the US is served by municipal wastewater collection systems, or around 272 million. 

Standard errors and sample sizes are not applicable to these signals.

<!-- TODO: cubic spline method may change over time -->

## Missingness

If a sample site has too few individuals, the NWSS does not provide the detailed data, so we cannot include it in our aggregations.

Also, data from sewersheds serving fewer than 3,000 people, as well as data from facility or institution specific sampling locations and tribal communities, are generally not available unless approved by the local jurisdiction.

## Lag and Backfill

Due to collection, shipping, processing and reporting time, these signals are subject to some lag.

> Typically, this is between 4-6 days.

Reviewer: We should probably re-assess this since it switched to weekly. Probably more accurate to say it's released weekly with a latency of ~4 days, but that's just looking at the most recent report

Author: Sounds good!
```suggestion
These signals are released weekly with ~4 days of latency
```

## Source and Licensing

This indicator aggregates data originating from the [NWSS](https://www.cdc.gov/nwss/index.html).
The site-level data is provided un-versioned via the Socrata API across pathogen-specific datasets: [SARS-CoV-2](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-SARS-CoV-2/j9g8-acpt) (`j9g8-acpt`), [Influenza A](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Influenza-A/ymmh-divb) (`ymmh-divb`), [H5 Influenza A / Avian Flu](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-H5-Influenza-A/mtpu-urpp) (`mtpu-urpp`), [RSV](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-RSV/45cq-cw4i) (`45cq-cw4i`), [Mpox](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Mpox/xpxn-rzgz) (`xpxn-rzgz`), and [Measles](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/CDC-Wastewater-Data-for-Measles/akvg-8vrb) (`akvg-8vrb`).

> The NWSS is aggregating data from [Verily](https://verily.com/solutions/public-health/wastewater), State Territorial and Local public health agencies, and [Wastewater Scan](https://www.wastewaterscan.org/en).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NWSS is aggregating data from [Verily](https://verily.com/solutions/public-health/wastewater), State Territorial and Local public health agencies, and [Wastewater Scan](https://www.wastewaterscan.org/en).

The WastewaterSCAN data were collected as part of the [WastewaterSCAN]([Wastewater Scan](https://www.wastewaterscan.org/en)) / SCAN project, a partnership between Stanford University, Emory University, and Verily funded philanthropically through a gift to Stanford University, and then shared with the NWSS. Anyone seeking to use the database for other purposes or for research is required to contact the WastewaterSCAN / SCAN team (email: [wwscan_stanford_emory@lists.stanford.edu](mailto:wwscan_stanford_emory@lists.stanford.edu)) and any use of the data should be cited appropriately (as described [here](https://data.wastewaterscan.org/about/#18)).
```
